Data
--
This data set is based on Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset Version 1.0 ([http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)). The original data, along with descriptions are available from [http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/UCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip).

The file list for the repo can be found in README.md
This repo does not contain any of the original data files

Transformations
--
For the purposes of this analysis, from the original dataset, the following files were loaded into R.
- `train/subject_train.txt`: Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 
- `train/X_train.txt`: Training set data.
- `train/y_train.txt`: activity list id's.
- `test/subject_train.txt`: Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. 
- `test/X_test.tx`t: Test set data.
- `test/y_test.txt`: Subject id's.
- `features.txt`: List of all variables.
- `activity_labels.txt`: Links the class labels with their activity name.

A full, ordered list of test subjects was generated by binding the `subject_train.txt` and `subject_test.txt` data sets.

The full ordered training set data were generated by binding the `x_test` and `X_train` data sets.

The full, ordered activity list was generated by binding the `y_train` and `y_test` data sets. Using a left join, these id's were associated with the descriptive activity names from the `activity_lables.txt` file.

The three resulting data sets were then combined via a column bind into a full data set (`data_full`). This data set included subject ID, activity ID, Activity name followed by all the data.

`data_full` was then assigned column names. Apart from the first 3 columns ("subject", "activityid", "activityname") the remaining column names were derived from the features text file. These remained unchanged as they well describe the data. Moreover, since there was no reason to reference them in R, there was no reason to remove hyphens or spaces. This decision also increases legibility between iterations of the data set.

`data_full` was then subset to include only the `subject` and `activityname` column, along with the columns whose names contained `mean()` or `std()`. Columns whose names contained the word mean without parentheses were excluded as the instructions called for measures which had means and standard deviations. These columns had no associated standard deviations.

In order to achieve mean values of each variable for each activity and each subject, the data was first melted into long format using `subject` and `activityname` as id variables `data_long`. 

These data were then cast back into wide format and the values meaned `data_wide_means`. 

Finally these wide data were melted again into long format with activity and activity name as id variables `tidy data`.

The variables in the variable column of `tidy_data` are listed below.

Variables
--
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value

std(): Standard deviation

**Variables listed in tidy_data.csv**

*Units*

Variables pertaining to acceleration (Acc) are measured in standard gravity units 'g'

Variables pertaining to angular velocity (Gyro) are measured in radians/second


1. subject: ID of the test subject
2. activityname: activity the subject was undertaking
3. tBodyAcc-mean()-X
4. tBodyAcc-mean()-Y
5. tBodyAcc-mean()-Z
6. tBodyAcc-std()-X
7. tBodyAcc-std()-Y
8. tBodyAcc-std()-Z
9. tGravityAcc-mean()-X
10. tGravityAcc-mean()-Y
11. tGravityAcc-mean()-Z
12. tGravityAcc-std()-X
13. tGravityAcc-std()-Y
14. tGravityAcc-std()-Z
15. tBodyAccJerk-mean()-X
16. tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y
17. tBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z
18. tBodyAccJerk-std()-X
19. tBodyAccJerk-std()-Y
20. tBodyAccJerk-std()-Z
21. tBodyGyro-mean()-X
22. tBodyGyro-mean()-Y
23. tBodyGyro-mean()-Z
24. tBodyGyro-std()-X
25. tBodyGyro-std()-Y
26. tBodyGyro-std()-Z
27. tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-X
28. tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Y
29. tBodyGyroJerk-mean()-Z
30. tBodyGyroJerk-std()-X
31. tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Y
32. tBodyGyroJerk-std()-Z
33. tBodyAccMag-mean()
34. tBodyAccMag-std()
35. tGravityAccMag-mean()
36. tGravityAccMag-std()
37. tBodyAccJerkMag-mean()
38. tBodyAccJerkMag-std()
39. tBodyGyroMag-mean()
40. tBodyGyroMag-std()
41. tBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()
42. tBodyGyroJerkMag-std()
43. fBodyAcc-mean()-X
44. fBodyAcc-mean()-Y
45. fBodyAcc-mean()-Z
46. fBodyAcc-std()-X
47. fBodyAcc-std()-Y
48. fBodyAcc-std()-Z
49. fBodyAccJerk-mean()-X
50. fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Y
51. fBodyAccJerk-mean()-Z
52. fBodyAccJerk-std()-X
53. fBodyAccJerk-std()-Y
54. fBodyAccJerk-std()-Z
55. fBodyGyro-mean()-X
56. fBodyGyro-mean()-Y
57. fBodyGyro-mean()-Z
58. fBodyGyro-std()-X
59. fBodyGyro-std()-Y
60. fBodyGyro-std()-Z
61. fBodyAccMag-mean()
62. fBodyAccMag-std()
63. fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-mean()
64. fBodyBodyAccJerkMag-std()
65. fBodyBodyGyroMag-mean()
66. fBodyBodyGyroMag-std()
67. fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-mean()
68. fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag-std()
